Postgres service announce blog post (#218)
xataio/mdx-blog: why_postgres.mdx

Data is automatically replicated, including schema changes, via logical replication to Elasticsearch, which serves our search, vector search, and aggregations endpoints, so the areas in which it excels. Files are stored in S3 and served through the Cloudflare CDN. The replication events are used to keep a reference count of the files, so they can be shared between branches, yet deleted when they are no longer needed.

If file attachments or full-text search or vector/hybrid search are important for your application, Xata will likely offer you a better platform to build on top than a classical DBaaS. And it's only the beginning, we are planning to have similar tightly-integrated solutions for time-series, intelligent caching, queuing, and more.

## The implementation

One key concept in the Xata implementation is the notion of _logical database branches_. A database can have multiple branches, and always has at least one, called by default `main`. A database branch is represented in Postgres as a [schema](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-schemas.html), and can be allocated on one of many Postgres clusters around the world, as well as moved from one cluster to another.

> This results in a level of decoupling between the logical databases and branches as experienced by the application, and the underlying Postgres instances where they are running. Because the clusters are already provisioned, logical databases and branches can be started instantly and allocated and moved depending on the business needs. This unlocks some interesting use-cases, like sharding per tenant where every tenant is a branch, or using a logical database for each micro-service, or automatically creating developer branches for each pull request. Or, and this is important for our free tier, have many small databases and branches share the same relatively large underlying Postgres cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This results in a level of decoupling between the logical databases and branches as experienced by the application, and the underlying Postgres instances where they are running. Because the clusters are already provisioned, logical databases and branches can be started instantly and allocated and moved depending on the business needs. This unlocks some interesting use cases, like sharding per tenant where every tenant is a branch, using a logical database for each micro-service, or automatically creating developer branches for each pull request. We use this logical separation in our free tier, where many small databases and branches share the same relatively large underlying Postgres cluster.
```

> ![Database branches scheduled on various Postgres clusters](images/branches-clusters.png)

Reviewer 2: I think the image is a bit confusing for the users as the implementation is only about "shared clusters", not "dedicated clusters". I suggest to maybe replace the "Shared clusters". and "Dedicated clusters" text with Postgres cluster.

Author: I think it's ok, we do mention Dedicated Clusters in this blog post, and having them named like that will let people know that "Shared" is not the only option.

> In order to make this possible, however, we had to solve several challenges: route traffic to the correct cluster based on metadata about the database branch, ensure that a branch level connection can only access that single branch, ensure that attackers can't call dangerous SQL functions, and limit noisy-neighbour issues in the shared clusters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to make this possible, however, we had to solve several challenges: 
- route traffic to the correct cluster based on metadata about the database branch 
- ensure that a branch level connection can only access that single branch 
- ensure that attackers can't call dangerous SQL functions
- limit noisy-neighbour issues in the shared clusters

```

Reviewer 3: Figured this might make it easier to read if split out rather than a very long sentence :)

Reviewer: I think we could also drop the `, however,` in this suggestion too

#### SQL Proxy

> The key to the solution for most of these issues is our SQL Proxy technology. While there are many Postgres proxies available (e.g. pgbouncer), the Xata SQL Proxy not only speaks the Postgres wire protocol, but also understands the SQL being executed at a fairly deep level. It can, for example, know which tables are accessed, which columns are requests, which functions are being called, with which parameters, and so on. This allows us to block actions that we know would be dangerous for the Postgres cluster. While the security is mostly ensured via Postgres roles, the Proxy can enforce rate and concurrency limits on shared clusters (we don't do that for dedicated clusters).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The key to the solution for most of these issues is our SQL Proxy technology. While there are many Postgres proxies available (e.g. pgbouncer), the Xata SQL Proxy not only speaks the Postgres wire protocol, but also understands the SQL being executed at a fairly deep level. It can, for example, know which tables are accessed, which columns are requested, which functions are being called, with which parameters, and so on. This allows us to block actions that we know would be dangerous for the Postgres cluster. While the security is mostly ensured via Postgres roles, the Proxy can enforce rate and concurrency limits on shared clusters (we don't do that for dedicated clusters).
```

> The Proxy allows us to "virtualize" access not only to the branch, but also to the Postgres catalog of tables, functions, sequences, and so on. ORMs like Prisma and Drizzle do fairly complex introspection to see the tables and columns that are currently defined, and we wanted to make sure they work without any modifications.

Reviewer 3: Do you think its worth adding a sentence in here about the new ORM integration and link to the respective announcement blogs?

Reviewer: I think we can link to the blogs too, they'll be there by Monday

> You might be wondering why we chose to represent database branches as Postgres schemas rather than Postgres database. The reason has to do with logical replication, which is a key component of the data platform, because reliable change-data-capture (CDC) is such an important feature keeping multiple data stores in sync. Individual databases would have forced us to do a replication slot for each.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You might be wondering why we chose to represent database branches as Postgres schemas rather than Postgres database. The reason has to do with logical replication, which is a key component of the database platform, because reliable change-data-capture (CDC) is such an important feature keeping multiple data stores in sync. Individual databases would have forced us to do a replication slot for each.
```

#### Logical replication events

Speaking of logical replication, another challenge that we had to solve was getting not only data events but also schema events from Postgres. A well known limitation of the Postgres logical replication system is that it only includes data changes, no DDL changes. Yet, having schema changes in the same stream of events simplifies significantly the downstream consumers for the logical replication events. The way we solve this is by installing [DDL event triggers](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/event-triggers.html) that are writing the schema changes to an "out-box" table, which gets replicated via the same replication slot.

We think this tech will be useful for many Postgres applications, so we are planning to open source it soon as its own project.

#### Integrated pgroll

> Finally, we have integrated [pgroll]() in our platform. pgroll is our open-source project for zero-downtime, reversable schema migrations. While `pgroll` is CLI tool, in order to integrated it seamlesly in the Xata platform, we have developed a server API for it, which integrates with our control plane. For now, this allows us to keep track of all DDL statements that are being executed and opens the door to a much better schema-changes workflow. Look out for a detailed blog post this week about pgroll and how we integrated it into Xata.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, we have integrated [pgroll]() in our platform. pgroll is our open-source project for zero-downtime, reversible schema migrations. While `pgroll` is a CLI tool, in order to integrated it seamlessly in the Xata platform, we have developed a server API for it, which integrates with our control plane. For now, this allows us to keep track of all DDL statements that are being executed and opens the door to a much better schema-changes workflow. Look out for a detailed blog post this week about pgroll and how we integrated it into Xata.
```

Reviewer: I believe "in order to integrated it seamlessly" should read 
"in order to integrate it seamlessly"

> Finally, we have integrated [pgroll]() in our platform. pgroll is our open-source project for zero-downtime, reversable schema migrations. While `pgroll` is CLI tool, in order to integrated it seamlesly in the Xata platform, we have developed a server API for it, which integrates with our control plane. For now, this allows us to keep track of all DDL statements that are being executed and opens the door to a much better schema-changes workflow. Look out for a detailed blog post this week about pgroll and how we integrated it into Xata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, we have integrated [pgroll]() in our platform. pgroll is our open-source project for zero-downtime, reversible schema migrations. While `pgroll` is CLI tool, in order to integrate it seamlessly in the Xata platform, we have developed a server API for it, which integrates with our control plane. For now, this allows us to keep track of all DDL statements that are being executed and opens the door to a much better schema-changes workflow. Look out for a detailed blog post this week about pgroll and how we integrated it into Xata.
```

## Get started

> The Xata Postgres service is currently in public Beta. You can opt-in to the Beta by flipping a flag in your [workspace's settings](). Once you have enabled the flag, when creating a new database, you can select whether you want to have Postgres direct access or not. Because the underlying changes are significant, at the moment, it's not possible to migrate existing Xata database to the Postgres kind. However, we are planning to provide a migration path during the Beta period.

Reviewer: Does beta need to be capitalized?

> ## Get started
> 
> The Xata Postgres service is currently in public Beta. You can opt-in to the Beta by flipping a flag in your [workspace's settings](). Once you have enabled the flag, when creating a new database, you can select whether you want to have Postgres direct access or not. Because the underlying changes are significant, at the moment, it's not possible to migrate existing Xata database to the Postgres kind. However, we are planning to provide a migration path during the Beta period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Get started

The Xata Postgres service is currently in public Beta. You can opt-in to the Beta by flipping a flag in your [workspace's settings](). Once you have enabled the flag, when creating a new database, you can select whether you want to have Postgres direct access or not. Because the underlying changes are significant, at the moment, it's not possible to migrate existing Xata database to the Postgres kind. However, we are planning to provide a migration path during the Beta period.

## Learn more
Want to learn more about the development of this service, the folks that built it and watch a quick demo of it in action? Check out our latest meet the makers session here.

<ArticleVideo platform="youtube" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/d-u2Naheqc4?si=dx9ZfGYTzD95-h26" />

Pop into [Discord](https://xata.io/discord) and say hi if you'd like to dig in further 👋 
```

@CezzaineZ I'm sure there's room for improvements, but what do you think about this in general? I thought it might make sense to have at the bottom. Open to any and all suggestions, but wanted to drop in so we don't forget. The YouTube videos are currently unlisted.

---
title: 'A new serverless Postgres platform'
description: "We're announcing the next major evolution for the Xata data platform, a serverless Postgres service."
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/postgres-direct-access.jpg
  alt: Serverless Postgres Platform
author: Monica Sarbu, Tudor Golubenco
date: 03-18-2024
tags: ['announcements']
published: true
slug: serverless-postgres-platform
---

> Starting today, Xata databases and branches are also serverless Postgres databases. This means you can connect to them using any Postgres client and generally use them as you would use any other Postgres database, while **still keeping** everything that you loved about Xata: instant DB/branch creation, zero cold starts, no pausing/sleeping in case of inactivity, the full-text search engine, the file attachments, and more. And yes, the Xata free tier also applies to the Postgres databases, making it one of the most generous free tiers for Postgres in the industry.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting today, Xata databases and branches are also serverless Postgres databases. This means you can connect to them using any Postgres client and generally use them as you would use any other Postgres database, while **still keeping** everything that you love about Xata: instant DB/branch creation, zero cold starts, no pausing/sleeping in case of inactivity, the full-text search engine, the file attachments, and more. And yes, the Xata free tier also applies to the Postgres databases, making it one of the most generous free tiers for Postgres in the industry.
```

Reviewer 3: Changing as its implies they no longer love us but of course they do ;-)

## The serverless Postgres service

This brings us to today's launch: a new serverless Postgres service at the center of the Xata platform. Looking at the Postgres service in isolation (ignoring everything else in the Xata platform), it fares pretty well:

- Separation of compute and storage, providing bottomless storage.
- Optional automatic scaling up and down based on the load.
- High availability via read replicas in multiple availability zones and automatic failover.
- Support for both the native Postgres wire protocol and SQL over HTTP (for easy access from edge functions).
- Support for the most common Postgres extensions.
- The ability to scale up to 1TB of RAM and 128 vCPUs.

We have designed the Postgres service to optimize for **reliability**, **scalability**, and **cost efficiency**.

#### Reliability

> The Xata Postgres service is using AWS Aurora under the hood, a battle-tested service that is used by many very large Postgres installations. We have been using AWS Aurora since the initial Xata launch and we have a reliability [track record](https://www.xatastatus.com/) that we are proud of. We now also have an official [SLA](/docs/appendix/sla).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Xata Postgres service is using AWS Aurora under the hood, a battle-tested service that is used by many very large Postgres installations. We have been using AWS Aurora since the initial Xata launch and we have a reliability [track record](https://www.xatastatus.com/) that we are proud of. We now also have an official [SLA](/docs/appendix/sla).
```
```suggestion
The Xata Postgres service is using AWS Aurora under the hood, a battle-tested service that is used by many very large Postgres installations. We have been using AWS Aurora since the initial Xata launch and we have a reliability [track record](https://www.xatastatus.com/) that we are proud of. We now also have an official [SLA](https://xata.io/docs/appendix/sla).
```

Author: This shouldn't be needed once it's merged, the relative docs links should work.

## The platform

It's quite possible to use Xata as a Postgres service and nothing else, and we couldn't be happier if you do. However, the way we think about Xata is not as a Postgres DBaaS, but as a **data platform for PostgreSQL**: multiple services and tools, integrated together much more tightly than in a classical cloud provider to simplify the way developers build data-centric applications and manage databases.

This is the Xata platform at the high level:

![Xata data platform diagram](images/xata-platform.png)

Data is automatically replicated, including schema changes, via logical replication to Elasticsearch, which serves our search, vector search, and aggregations endpoints, so the areas in which it excels. Files are stored in S3 and served through the Cloudflare CDN. The replication events are used to keep a reference count of the files, so they can be shared between branches, yet deleted when they are no longer needed.

> If file attachments or full-text search or vector/hybrid search are important for your application, Xata will likely offer you a better platform to build on top than a classical DBaaS. And it's only the beginning, we are planning to have similar tightly-integrated solutions for time-series, intelligent caching, queuing, and more.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If file attachments or full-text search or vector/hybrid search are important for your application, Xata will likely offer you a better platform to build on top of than a classical DBaaS. And it's only the beginning, we are planning to have similar tightly-integrated solutions for time-series, intelligent caching, queuing, and more.
```

This results in a level of decoupling between the logical databases and branches as experienced by the application, and the underlying Postgres instances where they are running. Because the clusters are already provisioned, logical databases and branches can be started instantly and allocated and moved depending on the business needs. This unlocks some interesting use cases, like sharding per tenant where every tenant is a branch, using a logical database for each micro-service, or automatically creating developer branches for each pull request. We use this logical separation in our free tier, where many small databases and branches share the same relatively large underlying Postgres cluster.

![Database branches scheduled on various Postgres clusters](images/branches-clusters.png)

In order to make this possible, we had to solve several challenges:

> - route traffic to the correct cluster based on metadata about the database branch
> - ensure that a branch level connection can only access that single branch
> - ensure that attackers can't call dangerous SQL functions
> - limit noisy-neighbor issues in the shared clusters

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Route traffic to the correct cluster based on metadata about the database branch.
- Ensure that a branch level connection can only access that single branch.
- Ensure that attackers can't call dangerous SQL functions.
- Limit noisy-neighbor issues in the shared clusters.
```

#### SQL Proxy

> The key to the solution for most of these issues is our SQL Proxy technology. While there are many Postgres proxies (e.g. pgbouncer, pgcat, Supavisor) serving various goals, the Xata SQL Proxy not only speaks the Postgres wire protocol, but also understands the SQL being executed at a fairly deep level. It can, for example, know which tables are accessed, which columns are requested, which functions are being called with which parameters, and so on. This allows us to block actions that would be dangerous for the Postgres cluster. While security is mostly ensured via Postgres roles, the Proxy can enforce rate and concurrency limits on shared clusters (we don't do this for dedicated clusters).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The key to the solution for most of these issues is our SQL Proxy technology. While there are many Postgres proxies (e.g. pgbouncer, pgcat, Supavisor) serving various goals, the Xata SQL Proxy not only speaks to the Postgres wire protocol, but also understands the SQL being executed at a fairly deep level. It can, for example, know which tables are accessed, which columns are requested, which functions are being called with which parameters, and so on. This allows us to block actions that would be dangerous for the Postgres cluster. While security is mostly ensured via Postgres roles, the Proxy can enforce rate and concurrency limits on shared clusters (we don't do this for dedicated clusters).
```

Reviewer 3: OK I wasnt sure if it was meant to be like that or intentional so all good :)

The Proxy allows us to "virtualize" access not only to the data in the branch, but also to the Postgres catalog of tables, functions, sequences, and so on. ORMs like Prisma and Drizzle do fairly complex introspection to see the tables and columns that are currently defined, and we wanted to make sure they work without any modifications.

> You might be wondering why we chose to represent database branches as Postgres schemas rather than Postgres database. The reason has to do with logical replication, which is a key component of the database platform, because reliable change-data-capture (CDC) is such an important feature keeping multiple data stores in sync. Individual databases would have forced us to do a replication slot for each.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You might be wondering why we chose to represent database branches as Postgres schemas rather than separate Postgres databases. The reason has to do with logical replication, which is a key component of the database platform, because reliable change-data-capture (CDC) is such an important feature keeping multiple data stores in sync. Individual databases would have forced us to do a replication slot for each.
```

> You might be wondering why we chose to represent database branches as Postgres schemas rather than Postgres database. The reason has to do with logical replication, which is a key component of the database platform, because reliable change-data-capture (CDC) is such an important feature keeping multiple data stores in sync. Individual databases would have forced us to do a replication slot for each.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You might be wondering why we chose to represent database branches as Postgres schemas rather than a Postgres database. The reason has to do with logical replication, which is a key component of the database platform, because reliable change-data-capture (CDC) is such an important feature keeping multiple data stores in sync. Individual databases would have forced us to do a replication slot for each.
```

Author: Accepted the change from Dave, which was similar.

#### Logical replication events

> Speaking of logical replication, another challenge that we had to solve was getting not only data events but also schema events from Postgres. A well known limitation of the Postgres logical replication system is that it only includes data changes, not DDL changes. Yet, having schema changes in the same stream of events significantly simplifies the downstream consumers for the logical replication events. The way we solve this is by installing [DDL event triggers](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/event-triggers.html) that are writing the schema changes to an "out-box" table, which gets replicated via the same replication slot.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Speaking of logical replication, another challenge that we had to solve was getting not only data events, but also schema events from Postgres. A well known limitation of the Postgres logical replication system is that it only includes data changes, not DDL changes. Yet, having schema changes in the same stream of events significantly simplifies the downstream consumers for the logical replication events. The way we solve this is by installing [DDL event triggers](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/event-triggers.html) that are writing the schema changes to an "out-box" table, which gets replicated via the same replication slot.
```

What is DDL? Can you link to it?

We think this tech will be useful for many Postgres applications, so we are planning to open source it soon as its own project.

#### Integrated pgroll

Another key piece of the new Xata architecture is [pgroll](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll), our open-source project for zero-downtime, reversible, schema migrations.

While `pgroll` is a CLI tool, in order to offer its benefits to all the Xata users, we have developed a server wrapper for it, which integrates with our control plane. This server offers an API for specific migrations as well as automatically intercepts DDLs executed over the wire protocol. This allows us to offer some of the benefits of pgroll nativly in the Xata platform, without you even having to know that you are using pgroll!

> While there is still work to do fully integrate pgroll, we already get some important benefits: maintaining a history of the schema migrations, avoiding [locking issues](https://xata.io/blog/postgres-schema-changes-pita) automatically, and enabling more complex migrations that require data backfill. We don't yet expose multiple versions of the schema at the same time, but we are planning to do so in the future. This will be key to enabling a simple and safe workflow for schema migrations of all kinds, and we're excited for that future.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While there is still work to do to fully integrate pgroll, you already get some important benefits: maintaining a history of the schema migrations, avoiding [locking issues](https://xata.io/blog/postgres-schema-changes-pita) automatically, and enabling more complex migrations that require data backfill. We don't yet expose multiple versions of the schema at the same time, but we are planning to do so in the future. This will be key to enabling a simple and safe workflow for schema migrations of all kinds, and we're excited for that future.
```

> Look out for a detailed blog post this week about pgroll and how we integrated it into Xata.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Later this week look out for a detailed blog post about pgroll and how we integrated it into Xata.
```

We think this tech will be useful for many Postgres applications, so we are planning to open source it soon as its own project.

#### Integrated pgroll

Finally, we have integrated [pgroll](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll) in our platform. pgroll is our open-source project for zero-downtime, reversible schema migrations.

While `pgroll` is a CLI tool, we have developed a server API for it, which integrates with our control plane. This allows us to offer some of the benefits of pgroll as native in the Xata platform, without you even having to know that you are using pgroll!

The benefits that are already enabled include maintain a history of the schema migrations, avoiding [locking issues](https://xata.io/blog/postgres-schema-changes-pita) automatically, and enabling more complex migrations that require data backfill. We don't yet expose multiple versions of the schema at the same time, but we'll be working on that next!

Look out for a detailed blog post this week about pgroll and how we integrated it into Xata.

## Get started

> The Xata Postgres service is currently in public beta. You can opt-in to the Beta by flipping a flag in your [workspace's settings](https://app.xata.io/workspaces/settings). Once you have enabled the flag, when creating a new database, you can select whether you want to have Postgres direct access or not. Because the underlying changes are significant, at the moment, it's not possible to migrate existing Xata database to the Postgres kind. However, we are planning to provide a migration path during the Beta period.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Xata Postgres service is currently in public beta. You can opt-in to the Beta by flipping a flag in your [workspace's settings](https://app.xata.io/workspaces/settings). Once you have enabled the flag, when creating a new database, you can select whether you want to have Postgres direct access or not. Because the underlying changes are significant, at the moment, it's not possible to migrate an existing Xata database to the Postgres kind. However, we are planning to provide a migration path during the Beta period.
```

## Learn more

> Want to learn more about the development of this service, the folks that built it and watch a quick demo of it in action? Check out our latest meet the makers session here.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Learn more about the development of this service from the folks that built it, and watch a quick demo to see it in action. Check out our latest meet the makers session here:
```

---

> title: 'A new serverless Postgres platform'

Reviewer: Whenever we land on a title, we should probably have the slug match with some discoverable keywords

Author: Done now, I used "serverless-data-platform".

description: "We're announcing the next major evolution for the Xata data platform, serverless Postgres."
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/xata-public-release.png
  alt: PostgreSQL
author: Monica Sarbu, Tudor Golubenco

> date: 03-11-2024

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 03-18-2024
```

tags: ['announcements']
published: false
slug: why-postgres
---

Tudor's list of alternate titles

- Why are we opening up our Postgres service?
- Why are we launching a new Postgres platform?
- A new type of PostgreSQL service
- Why are we launching a new type of Postgres service

> - Why the world needs a new Postgres cloud service?

Reviewer 4: @tsg I moved the alternates into your body so the page could still build a preview.

---
title: 'Why a new Postgres platform?'
alternate_titles:
  - Why are we opening up our Postgres service?
  - Why are we launching a new Postgres platform?
  - A new type of PostgreSQL service
  - Why are we launching a new type of Postgres service
  - Why the world needs a new Postgres cloud service?

> description: "We're announcing the next major evolution for the Xata data platform: we are now offering a serverless Postgres service, and we think it is one the best ways to run Postgres in the cloud today."

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
description: "We're announcing the next major evolution for the Xata data platform: we are now offering a serverless Postgres service, and we think it is one of the best ways to run Postgres in the cloud today."
```

Even on the free tier we offer high-availability and redundancy, with replicas running in multiple availability zones. The failover from the primary instance to a replica is automatic and it's guaranteed to have no data loss. At the storage layer, the data is synchronously replicated to six storage nodes across three availability zones.

#### Scalability

Available instance types in Xata go up to 128 vCPUs and 1TB of RAM. Storage can be scaled up to 128TiB per cluster. That is quite a lot of headroom for vertical scaling.

When it comes to horizontal scaling, the fact that you can create databases and branches instantly and that you can move them between clusters without downtime, opens up several architectural possibilities. For example, you can create a logical database for each of your customers, and place them in different regions. This is possible thanks to our [global control plane and logical databases]().

#### Cost efficiency

> Xata achieves cost efficiency for as many use cases as possible is by offering a high degree of **optionality**. The innovation of the Xata service is that we make it really easy to move from one type of cluster to another, without downtime. This means that you can easily try your workload on different types of clusters and see which one is the most cost-efficient for you.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Xata achieves cost efficiency for as many use cases as possible by offering a high degree of **optionality**. The innovation of the Xata service is that we make it really easy to move from one type of cluster to another, without downtime. This means that you can easily try your workload on different types of clusters and see which one is the most cost-efficient for you.
```

At small scale, we offer a free tier that includes high-availability and read replicas, no cold-starts, and no instance-pausing-after-a-few-days. We can offer this sustainably because the free tier makes use of [shared clusters]() and auto-scaling.

At large scale, when using [dedicated clusters]() you pay for the resources you use and you have a high degree of control. For example, for predictable load, you can configure a particular instance size, while for unpredictable load, auto-scaling will likely be more cost-efficient. Similarly, you can choose between standard storage and I/O optimized storage, which is more cost-efficient for I/O-heavy workloads.

## The free tier

Given that free plans across the industry tend to die early recently, you might be looking a bit skeptically at our 15GB free storage, HA included, no-cold-starts, too-good-to-be-true free tier. We know that trust is won over many years (and lost in minutes), that we are a startup doing startup-y things, that interest rates _something something_, but we think there are a couple things that are worth saying now.

> First, the Xata architecture was built from the start to be able to offer a free tier sustainably, thanks to the use of shared clusters and auto-scaling. Currently, a free **active** database with constant traffic within the rate limits costs us less than $1.5/month. That includes not only Postgres but also Elasticsearch and the replication between them, as well as running a replica for high-availability. That's why we don't really need to pause or sleep database in case of inactivity yet, at least not in a matter of days. We are planning, however, to pause the replication if it is not used and we will eventually off-load databases after a long period of inactivity, measured in months, to further improve the economics of our free tier.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
First, the Xata architecture was built from the start to be able to offer a free tier sustainably, thanks to the use of shared clusters and auto-scaling. Currently, a free **active** database with constant traffic within the rate limits costs us less than $1.5/month. That includes not only Postgres but also Elasticsearch and the replication between them, as well as running a replica for high-availability. That's why we don't really need to pause or sleep databases in case of inactivity yet, at least not in a matter of days. We are planning, however, to pause the replication if it is not used and we will eventually off-load databases after a long period of inactivity, measured in months, to further improve the economics of our free tier.
```

---

> title: 'Why a new Postgres platform?'

Author: Also CC-ing @snide because he knows HN best.

> title: 'Why a new Postgres platform?'

Reviewer 3: I like the 2nd one but would tweak slightly to "The world doesn't need another Postgres service, they need a Postgres database platform"

Other click-baity suggestions:

- We Exposed PostgreSQL (And Here's Why You Should Too)
- Is Postgres Enough? Xata Reimagines the Future 
- Introducing a Postgres Service Your Devs Will Actually Love
- Evolving Postgres Beyond the Database
- Stop Managing Postgres, Focus on Your App

> title: 'Why a new Postgres platform?'

Reviewer 4: Missed this one from @CezzaineZ because I read the bullet points. "The world doesn't need another Postgres service, they need a Postgres database platform"

Possible slant for brevity.

"You don't need a Postgres host, you need a Postgres Platform"

> title: 'Why a new Postgres platform?'

Reviewer: Adding in one other idea that I got after reading some of these:

"Postgres can't do everything"
"Postgres can't do everything, but a platform for Postgres can"

> title: 'Why a new Postgres platform?'

Author: So I have another draft blog post that goes into that direction of "Postgres can't do everything" and pros/cons for "Postgres for everything" versus "Right tool for the job". But I feel like this one should be a bit more like an announcement, we're launching a new Postgres service, with the twist of the data platform.

> title: 'Why a new Postgres platform?'

Author: How about something along the lines of:
-  "A new Postgres platform" 
-  "A new serverless Postgres platform"
- "Xata, a new Postgres platform"
- "Xata, a new serverless Postgres platform"

It's not controversial but has novelty, which also tends to do well. An we could do a "Show HN" post for it, I think that might be ok as per the HN rules.

> title: 'Why a new Postgres platform?'

Reviewer 2: My suggestion: 

For HN:
"How we built the free tier in our Postgres service to be cost efficient, with HA and no pausing"
For blog post: 
"How we built our new Postgres service"

> title: 'Why a new Postgres platform?'

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't bet on the "database platform" as people don't know what it means. I think just calling it a Postgres service is better understood.

alternate_titles:
  - Why are we opening up our Postgres service?
  - Why are we launching a new Postgres platform?
  - A new type of PostgreSQL service
  - Why are we launching a new type of Postgres service
  - Why the world needs a new Postgres cloud service?
description: "We're announcing the next major evolution for the Xata data platform: we are now offering a serverless Postgres service, and we think it is one of the best ways to run Postgres in the cloud today."
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/xata-public-release.png
  alt: PostgreSQL
author: Monica Sarbu
date: 03-11-2024

> tags: ['announcements']

Author: Postgres tag means we submit it for Planet Postgres, but that's not yet approved. We have to be careful that they don't reject our first blog post.

> tags: ['announcements']

Reviewer: ah yes, fair point.

published: false
slug: why-postgres
---

> Starting today, Xata databases and branches are also serverless Postgres databases. This means you can connect to them using any Postgres client and generally use them as you would use any other Postgres database, while **still keeping** everything that you loved about Xata, including instant DB/branch creation, zero cold starts, no pausing/sleeping in case of inactivity, the full-text search engine, the file attachments, and more.

Author: Yeah, we need a public beta call out and instructions on how to enable it. I'll add something, not sure if this exact wording.

> Starting today, Xata databases and branches are also serverless Postgres databases. This means you can connect to them using any Postgres client and generally use them as you would use any other Postgres database, while **still keeping** everything that you loved about Xata, including instant DB/branch creation, zero cold starts, no pausing/sleeping in case of inactivity, the full-text search engine, the file attachments, and more.

Reviewer: Re-reading from the preview, but the current sentence that's merged is a bit of a run on. So if we don't adjust this way, we'll at least need to chop that up

We imagined our product as the middle ground between Airtable and traditional databases, and we think we've done a pretty good job at that. Like in Airtable, the "xatabases" start instantly, have rich types, have no cold starts, and are never paused. Like in traditional databases, they have no rows limitations, have ACID transactions, constraints and referential integrity, and are highly performant.

Since then, a few tens of thousands of developers discovered Xata, used it in their projects, and gave us extremely valuable feedback. As you'll see if you read our [community spotlights](https://xata.io/blog/tags/community), developers appreciate how easy Xata is to get started with and how it feels like a SaaS rather than a DBaaS.

> Over the past year, we have released a new [developer workflow](https://xata.io/blog/workflow-github-vercel-netlify-xata) for making schema changes via our branches functionality, and then [File Attachments](https://xata.io/blog/file-attachments), which make it easy to work with large files and images in your database. Both these features generated a [lot](https://x.com/rauchg/status/1651614599874252802?s=20) of [excitement](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=37324370), and we think they push the state of the art just a little bit for [serverless data platforms](https://xata.io/blog/database-platforms-trend).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Over the past months, we have released features that have changed the way our community thinks about databases. From introducing [branches functionality](https://xata.io/blog/branching-benefits-git-databases) that allows you to branch your database just like your code, and a new git-like [developer workflow](https://xata.io/blog/workflow-github-vercel-netlify-xata) for making schema changes via our branches functionality, to [File Attachments](https://xata.io/blog/file-attachments), which make it easy to work with large files and images in your database. These features generated a [lot](https://x.com/rauchg/status/1651614599874252802?s=20) of [excitement](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=37324370), and we believe are helping to pioneer a new wave of innovation for [serverless database platforms](https://xata.io/blog/database-platforms-trend).
```

> Last but not least, we have started executing on our open source strategy to build a data platform around Postgres. Our first tool, [pgroll](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll), provides zero-downtime and reversible schema migrations for any PostgreSQL database. This has also generated [quite](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=37752366) a bit of [interest](https://simonwillison.net/2024/Jan/30/pgroll/) from the broader Postgres community. Later this week we'll be announcing another open source project that we think you'll love 🦎.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Recently, we have started on a journey to build the tooling companies need around Postgres to easily build, manage and scale their applications. Our first tool, [pgroll](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll), provides zero-downtime and reversible schema migrations for any PostgreSQL database. This has also generated [quite](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=37752366) a bit of [interest](https://simonwillison.net/2024/Jan/30/pgroll/) from the broader Postgres community. Later this week we'll be announcing another open source project that we think you'll love 🦎.
```

> ## The Postgres service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The serverless Postgres service
```

#### Cost efficiency

Xata achieves cost efficiency for as many use cases as possible by offering a high degree of **optionality**. The innovation of the Xata service is that we make it really easy to move from one type of cluster to another, without downtime. This means that you can easily try your workload on different types of clusters and see which one is the most cost-efficient for you.

At small scale, we offer a free tier that includes high-availability and read replicas, no cold-starts, and no instance-pausing-after-a-few-days. We can offer this sustainably because the free tier makes use of [shared clusters]() and auto-scaling.

At large scale, when using [dedicated clusters]() you pay for the resources you use and you have a high degree of control. For example, for predictable load, you can configure a particular instance size, while for unpredictable load, auto-scaling will likely be more cost-efficient. Similarly, you can choose between standard storage and I/O optimized storage, which is more cost-efficient for I/O-heavy workloads.

> ## The free tier

Reviewer: I go back and forth on explicitly calling out the free tier. It feels a little like a jab, which is maybe fine. I have some other ideas for the title.

Floating an idea. But what if we closed with this instead and turn it into a call to action. The title would be "Get started on our production ready free tier today" and the content itself would more or less stay the same.

Reviewer 3: Not a bad idea, and I don't see it as a jab. It's an opportunity 😄

> Given that free plans across the industry tend to die early recently, you might be looking a bit skeptically at our 15GB free storage, HA included, no-cold-starts, too-good-to-be-true free tier. We know that trust is won over many years (and lost in minutes), that we are a startup doing startup-y things, that interest rates _something something_, but we think there are a couple things that are worth saying now.

Reviewer: I absolutely love the tone and sarcasm in this paragraph, but it doesn't sound like Monica haha. She's listed as the author, not sure how important that is.

Reviewer 3: Is this line "that interest rates _something something_" intentional or a placeholder to fill in with something else?

Reviewer: I believe it's intentional

> First, the Xata architecture was built from the start to be able to offer a free tier sustainably, thanks to the use of shared clusters and auto-scaling. Currently, a free **active** database with constant traffic within the rate limits costs us less than $1.5/month. That includes not only Postgres but also Elasticsearch and the replication between them, as well as running a replica for high-availability.

Reviewer: I'm not sure of the reaction we'll get with sharing how much it costs to run a platform for each free trial.

$1.5 * 20k = $30k
$1.5 * 500k =  $750k

Obviously this doesn't take into account archival, but still, by sharing this price we open up the discussion as to how scalable this is over time.

> This is possible thanks to our shared clusters (see [The implementation](#the-implementation)) and this cost per free database will go down significantly as we disable search and replication if not used at all, offload databases to cold storage if inactive for several months, and so on. In other words, the cost of a mostly inactive database is close to zero.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we need to highlight the fact that we aren't archiving these. But this would be a good place to call out what Monica shared earlier today. We believe that we have an architecture that enables us to offer a free tier, at any scale, without breaking the bank.

> Secondly, the free tier is important to me personally because of the company history. The idea of Xata was born out of a non-profit, when we realized that managing databases is a limiting factor for many small projects. Today I'm proud to say that multiple non-profits are building on top of Xata, some on the free tier.

Reviewer: This part is really great and goes beyond the economics of a free tier. Is there anything we can reference? Maybe it deserves a sentence or two in the introduction paragraph above.

> ## The platform

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The Postgres platform
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The database platform
```

> It's quite possible to use Xata as a Postgres service and nothing else, and we couldn't be more happy if you do. However, the way we think about Xata is not as a Postgres DBaaS, but as a **data platform for PostgreSQL**: multiple services and tools, integrated together much closer than in a classical cloud provider, simplifying the way developers build data-centric applications and manage databases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's quite possible to use Xata as a Postgres service and nothing else, and we couldn't be more happy if you do. However, the way we think about Xata is not as a Postgres DBaaS, but as a **database platform for PostgreSQL**: multiple services and tools, integrated together much closer than in a classical cloud provider, simplifying the way developers build data-centric applications, manage and scale databases.
```

This is the Xata platform at the high level:

> ![Xata data platform diagram](images/xata-platform.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Xata database platform diagram](images/xata-platform.png)
```
